The ball was only just beginning as and her mother walked up the great staircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen in powder and red coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as from a hive, and the rustle of movement; and while on the landing between trees they gave last touches to their hair and dresses before the mirror, they heard from the ballroom the careful, distinct notes of the fiddles of the orchestra beginning the first waltz. A little old man in civilian dress, arranging his gray curls before another mirror, and diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them on the stairs, and stood aside, evidently admiring, whom he did not know. A beardless youth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince called ‘young bucks,’ in an exceedingly open waistcoat, straightening his white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after running by, came back to ask for a quadrille. As the first quadrille had already been given to, she had to promise this youth the second. An officer, buttoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking his mustache, admired rosy. Although her dress, her coiffure, and all the preparations for the ball had cost  great trouble and consideration, at this moment she walked into the ballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip as easily and simply as though all the rosettes and lace, all the minute details of her attire, had not cost her or her family a moment’s attention, as though she had been born in that tulle and lace, with her hair done up high on her head, and a rose and two leaves on the top of it. When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, tried to turn right side out of the ribbon of her sash,  had drawn back a little. She felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful, and nothing could need setting straight. It was one of best days. Her dress was not uncomfortable anywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were not crushed nor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels did not pinch, but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fair chignon kept up on her head as if they were her own hair. All the three buttons buttoned up without tearing on the long glove that covered her hand without concealing its lines. The black velvet of her locket nestled with special softness round her neck. That velvet was delicious; at home, looking at her neck in the looking glass,  had felt that that velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a doubt, but the velvet was delicious.  smiled here too, at the ball, when she glanced at it in the glass. Her bare shoulders and arms gave  a sense of chill marble, a feeling she particularly liked. Her eyes sparkled, and her rosy lips could not keep from smiling from the consciousness of her own attractiveness. She had scarcely entered the ballroom and reached the throng of ladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, and flowers, waiting to be asked to dance— was never one of that throng—when she was asked for a waltz, and asked by the best partner, the first star in the hierarchy of the ballroom, a renowned director of dances, a married man, handsome and wellbuilt, Yegorushka . He had only just left the Countess, with whom he had danced the first half of the waltz, and, scanning his kingdom—that is to say, a few couples who had started dancing—he caught sight of , entering, and flew up to her with that peculiar, easy amble which is confined to directors of balls. Without even asking her if she cared to dance, he put out his arm to encircle her slender waist. She looked round for someone to give her fan to, and their hostess, smiling to her, took it. ‘How nice you’ve come in good time,’ he said to her, embracing her waist; ‘such a bad habit to be late.’ Bending her left hand, she laid it on his shoulder, and her little feet in their pink slippers began swiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slippery floor in time to the music. ‘It’s a rest to waltz with you,’ he said to her, as they fell into the first slow steps of the waltz. ‘It’s exquisite—such lightness, precision.’ He said to her the same thing he said to almost all his partners whom he knew well. She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over his shoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces in the ballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a girl who had gone the stale round of balls till every face in the ballroom was familiar and tiresome. But she was in the middle stage between these two; she was excited, and at the same time she had sufficient self-possession to be able to observe. In the left corner of the ballroom she saw the cream of society gathered together. There—incredibly naked—was the beauty wife; there was the lady of the house; there shone the bald head of, always to be found where the best people were. In that direction gazed the young men, not venturing to approach. There, too, she descried, and there she saw the exquisite figure and head of in a black velvet gown. And HE was there.  had not seen him since the evening she refused. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once, and was even aware that he was looking at her. ‘Another turn, eh? You’re not tired?’ said , a little out of breath. ‘No, thank you!’ ‘Where shall I take you?’ ‘Madame here, I think...take me to her.’ ‘Wherever you command.’ And  began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the group in the left corner, continually saying, ‘Pardon, mesdames, pardon, pardon, mesdames"; and steering his course through the sea of lace, tulle, and ribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partner sharply round, so that her slim ankles, in light transparent stockings, were exposed to view, and her train floated out in fan shape and covered knees. bowed, set straight his open shirt front, and gave her his arm to conduct her to. , flushed, took her train from  knees, and, a little giddy, looked round, seeking .  was not in lilac, as  had so urgently wished, but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing her full throat and shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and her rounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was trimmed with Venetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her own, with no false additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of the same in the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her coiffure was not striking. All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils of her curly hair that would always break free about her neck and temples. Round her well-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.  had been seeing  every day; she adored her, and had pictured her invariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she had not fully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and surprising to her. Now she understood that  could not have been in lilac, and that her charm was just that she always stood out against her attire, that her dress could never be noticeable on her. And her black dress, with its sumptuous lace, was not noticeable on her; it was only the frame, and all that was seen was she—simple, natural, elegant, and at the same time gay and eager. She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when  drew near the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her head slightly turned towards him. ‘No, I don’t throw stones,’ she was saying, in answer to something, ‘though I can’t understand it,’ she went on, shrugging her shoulders, and she turned at once with a soft smile of protection towards . With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and made a movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by , signifying approval of her dress and her looks. ‘You came into the room dancing,’ she added. ‘This is one of my most faithful supporters,’ said , bowing to  , whom he had not yet seen. ‘The princess helps to make balls happy and successful.  , a waltz?’ he said, bending down to her. ‘Why, have yo met?’ inquired their host. ‘Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like white wolves—everyone knows us,’ answered . ‘A waltz,  ?’ ‘I don’t dance when it possible not to dance,’ she said. ‘But tonight it’s impossible,’ answered . At that instant  came up. ‘Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start,’ she said, not noticing  bow, and she hastily put her hand on shoulder. ‘What is she vexed with him about?’ thought , discerning that  had intentionally not responded to bow.  went up to  reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret that he had not seen her all this time.  gazed in admiration at  waltzing, and listened to him. She expected him to ask her for a waltz, but he did not, and she glanced wonderingly at him. He flushed slightly, and hurriedly asked her to waltz, but he had only just put his arm round her waist and taken the first step when the music suddenly stopped.  looked into his face, which was so close to her own, and long afterwards—for several years after—that look, full of love, to which he made no response, cut her to the heart with an agony of shame. ‘Pardon! pardon! Waltz! waltz!’ shouted  from the other side of the room, and seizing the first young lady he came across he began dancing himself.  and  waltzed several times round the room. After the first waltz  went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few words to Countess  when  came up again for the first quadrille. During the quadrille nothing of any significance was said: there was disjointed talk between them of the s, husband and wife, whom he described very amusingly, as delightful children at forty, and of the future town theater; and only once the conversation touched her to the quick, when he asker her about , whether he was here, and added that he liked him so much. But  did not expect much from the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at her heart to the mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must be decided. The fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurka did not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him as she had done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she was engaged for the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for  an enchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. she only sat down when she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as she was dancing the last quadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom she could not refuse, she chanced to be vis-a-vis with  and . She had not been near  again since the beginning of the evening, and now again she saw her suddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her the signs of that excitement of success she knew so well in herself; she saw that she was intoxicated with the delighted admiration she was exciting. She knew that feeling and knew its signs, and saw them in ; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, and the smile of happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, and the deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements. ‘Who?’ she asked herself. ‘All or one?’ And not assisting the harassed young man she was dancing with in the conversation, the thread of which he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed with external liveliness the peremptory shouts of  starting them all into the grand round, and then into the chaine, and at the same time she kept watch with a growing pang at her heart. ‘No, it’s not the admiration of the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one. And that one? can it be he?’ Every time he spoke to  the joyous light flashed into her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. she seemed to make an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of delight, but they came out on her face of themselves. ‘But what of him?’  looked at him and was filled with terror. What was pictured so clearly to  in the mirror of  face she saw in him. What had become of his always self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression of his face? Now every time he turned to her, he bent his head, as though he would have fallen at her feet, and in his eyes there was nothing but humble submission and dread. ‘I would not offend you,’ his eyes seemed every time to be saying, ‘but I want to save myself, and I don’t know how.’ On his face was a look such as  have never seen before. They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivial conversation, but to  it seemed that every word they said was determining their fate and hers. And strange it was that they were actually talking of how absurd  ovitch was with his French, and how the Eletsky girl might have made a better match, yet these words had all the while consequence for them, and they were feeling just as  did. The whole ball, the whole world, everything seemed lost in fog in  soul. Nothing but the stern discipline of her bringing-up supported her and forced her to do what was expected of her, that is, to dance, to answer questions, to talk, even to smile. But before the mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the chairs and a few couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big room, a moment of despair and horror came for . She had refused five partners, and now she was not dancing the mazurka. She had not even a hope of being asked for it, because she was so successful in society that the idea would never occur to anyone that she had remained disengaged till now. She would have to tell her mother she felt ill and go home, but she had not the strength to do this. She felt crushed. She went to the furthest end of the little drawing room and sank into a low chair. Her light, transparent skirts rose like a cloud about her slender waist; one bare, thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly, was lost in the folds of her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with rapid, short strokes fanned her burning face. But while she looked like a butterfly, clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wings for fresh flight, her heart ached with a horrible despair. ‘But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?’ And again she recalled all she had seen. ‘, what is it?’ said Countess , stepping noiselessly over the carpet towards her. ‘I don’t understand it.’  lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly. ‘, you’re not dancing the mazurka?’ ‘No, no,’ said  in a voice shaking with tears. ‘He asked her for the mazurka before me,’ said Countess , knowing  would understand who were ‘he’ and ‘her.’ ‘She said: ‘Why, aren’t you going to dance it with Princess ?’.’ ‘Oh, I don’t care!’ answered . No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she had just refused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him because she had put her faith in another. Countess  found , with whom she was to dance the mazurka, and told him to ask .  danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to talk, because  was all the time running about directing the figure.  and  sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her long-sighted eyes, and saw them, too, close by, when they met in the figures, and the more she saw of them the more convinced was she that her unhappiness was complete. She saw that they felt themselves alone in that crowded room. And on  face, always so firm and independent, she saw that look that had struck her, of bewilderment and humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligent dog when it has done wrong.  smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful, and he became serious. Some supernatural force drew  eyes to  face. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating were her round arms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck with its thread of pearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose hair, fascinating the graceful, light movements of her little feet and hands, fascinating was that lovely face in its eagerness, but there was something terrible and cruel in her fascination.  admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her suffering.  felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When  saw her, coming across her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize her, she was so changed. ‘Delightful ball!’ he said to her, for the sake of saying something. ‘Yes,’ she answered. In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly invented by ,  came forward into the center of the circle, chose two gentlemen, and summoned a lady and .  gazed at her in dismay as she went up.  looked at her with drooping eyelids, and smiled, pressing her had. But, noticing that  only responded to her smile by a look of despair and amazement, she turned away from her, and began gaily talking to the other lady. ‘Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,’  said to herself.  did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began to press her to do so. ‘Nonsense,  ,’ said , drawing her bare arm under the sleeve of his dress coat, ‘I’ve such an idea for a cotillion! Un bijou!’ And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him. Their hose smiled approvingly. ‘No, I am not going to stay,’ answered , smiling, but in spite of her smile, both  and the master of the house saw from her resolute tone that she would not stay. ‘No; why, as it is, I have danced mor at your ball in  that I have all the winter in Petersburg,’ said , looking round at , who stood near her. ‘I must rest a little before my journey.’ ‘Are you certainly going orrow then?’ asked . ‘Yes, I suppose so,’ answered , as it were wondering at the boldness of his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of her eyes and her smile set him on fire as she said it.   did not stay to supper, but went home. ‘Yes, there is something in be hatful, repulsive,’ thought , as he came away from the ’, and walked in the direction of his brother’s lodgings. ‘And I don’t get on with other people. Pride, they say. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should not have put myself in such a position.’ And he pictured to himself , happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed in the awful position in which he had been that evening. ‘Yes, she was bound to choose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone or anything. I am myself to blame. What right had I to imagine she would care to join her life to mine? Whom am I and what am I? A nobody, not wanted by any one, nor of use to anybody.’ And he recalled his brother , and dwelt with pleasure on the thought of him. ‘Isn’t he right that everything in the world is base and loathsome? And are we fair in our judgment of brother ? Of course, from the point of view of Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak and tipsy, he’s a despicable person. But I know him differently. I know his soul, and know that we are like him. And I, instead of going to seek him out, went out to dinner, and came here.’  walked up to a lamppost, read his brother’s address, which was in his pocketk, and called a sledge. All the long way to his brother’s,  vividly recalled all the facts familiar to him of his brother  life. He remembered how his brother, while at the university, and for a year afterwards, had, in spite of the jeers of his companions, lived like a monk, strictly observing all religious rites, services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure, especially women. And afterwards, how he had all at once broken out: he had associated with the most horrible people, and rushed into the most senseless debauchery. He remembered later the scandal over a boy, whom he had taken from the country to bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so violently beaten that proceedings were brought against him for unlawfully wounding. Then he recalled the scandal with a sharper, to whom he had lost money, and given a promissory note, and against whom he had himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he had cheated him. (This was the money  had paid.) Then he remembered how he had spent a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in the street. He remembered the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up against his brother , accusing him of not having paid him his share of his mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to a western province in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble for assaulting a village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yet to  it appeared not at all in the same disgusting light as it inevitably would to those who did not know , did not know all his story, did not know his heart.  remembered that when  had been in the devout stage, the period of fasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in religion a support and a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone, far from encouraging him, had jeered at him, and he, too, with the others. They had teased him, called him Noah and Monk; and, when he had broken out, no one had helped him, but everyone had turned away from him with horror and disgust.  felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother , in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in the wrong than the people who despised him. He was not to blame for having been born with his unbridled temperament and his somehow limited intelligence. But he had always wanted to be good. ‘I will tell him everything, without reserve, and I will make him speak without reserve, too, and I’ll show him that I love him, and so understand him,’  resolved to himself, as, towards eleven o’clock, he reached the hotel of which he had the address. ‘At the top, 12 and 13,’ the porter answered  inquiry. ‘At home?’ ‘Sure to be at home.’ The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak of light thick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice, unknown to ; but he knew at once that his brother was there; he heard his cough. As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying: ‘It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’s done.’   looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a young man with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and that a pockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was sitting on the sofa. His brother was not to be seen.  felt a sharp pang at his heart at the thought of the strange company in which his brother spent his life. No one had heard him, and , taking off his galoshes, listened to what the gentleman in the jerkin was saying. He was speaking of some enterprise. ‘Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes,’ his brother’s voice responded, with a cough. ‘! get us some supper and some wine if there’s any left; or else go and get some.’ The woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw . ‘There’s some gentleman,  she said. ‘Whom do you want?’ said the voice of  , angrily. ‘It’s I,’ answered  , coming forward into the light. ‘Who’s I?’  voice said again, still more angrily. He could be heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling against something, and  saw, facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, and the huge, thin, stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yet astonishing in it weirdness and sickliness. He was even thinner than three years before, when   had seen him last. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bones seemed huger than ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straight mustaches hid his lips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naively at his visitor. ‘Ah,!’ he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, and his eyes lit up with joy. But the same second he looked round at the young man, and gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that  knew so well, as if his neckband hurt him; and a quite different expression, wild, suffering, and cruel, rested on his emaciated fact. ‘I wrote to you and  both that I don’t know you and don’t want to know you. What is it you want?’ He was not at all the same as  had been fancying him. The worst and most tiresome part of his character, what made all relations with him so difficult, had been forgotten by   when he thought of him, and now, when he saw his face, and especially that nervous twitching of his head, he remembered it all. ‘I didn’t want to see you for anything,’ he answered timidly. ‘I’ve simply come to see you.’ His brother’s timidity obviously softened . His lips twitched. ‘Oh, so that’s it?’ he said. ‘Well, come in; sit down. Like some supper? , bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you know who this is?’ he said, addressing. When he was nearly thirteen, my brother  got his arm badly broken at the elbow. When it healed, and  fears of never being able to play football were assuaged, he was seldom self-conscious about his injury. His left arm was somewhat shorter than his right; when he stood or walked, the back of his hand was at right angles to his body, his thumb parallel to his thigh. He couldn’t have cared less, so long as he could pass and punt. When enough years had gone by to enable us to look back on them, we sometimes discussed the events leading to his accident. I maintain that the Ewells started it all, but , who was four years my senior, said it started long before that. He said it began the summer  came to us, when  first gave us the idea of making  come out. I said if he wanted to take a broad view of the thing, it really began with  . If General  hadn’t run the Creeks up the creek,   would never have paddled up the , and where would we be if he hadn’t? We were far too old to settle an argument with a fist-fight, so we consulted . Our father said we were both right. Being Southerners, it was a source of shame to some members of the family that we had no recorded ancestors on either side of the Battle of Hastings. All we had was  , a fur-trapping apothecary from  whose piety was exceeded only by his stinginess. In ,  was irritated by the persecution of those who called themselves Methodists at the hands of their more liberal brethren, and as  called himself a Methodist, he worked his way across the Atlantic to , thence to Jamaica, thence to Mobile, and up the . Mindful of   strictures on the use of many words in buying and selling,  made a pile practicing medicine, but in this pursuit he was unhappy lest he be tempted into doing what he knew was not for the glory of God, as the putting on of gold and costly apparel. So , having forgotten his teacher’s dictum on the possession of human chattels, bought three slaves and with their aid established a homestead on the banks of the  River some forty miles above . He returned to  only once, to find a wife, and with her established a line that ran high to daughters.  lived to an impressive age and died rich. It was cusary for the men in the family to remain on  homestead,  Landing, and make their living from cotton. The place was self-sufficient: modest in comparison with the empires around it, the Landing nevertheless produced everything required to sustain life except ice, wheat flour, and articles of clothing, supplied by river-boats from Mobile.  would have regarded with impotent fury the disturbance between the North and the South, as it left his descendants stripped of everything but their land, yet the tradition of living on the land remained unbroken until well into the twentieth century, when my father,  , went to Montgomery to read law, and his younger brother went to Boston to study medicine. Their sister Alexandra was the  who remained at the Landing: she married a taciturn man who spent most of his time lying in a hammock by the river wondering if his trot-lines were full. When my father was admitted to the bar, he returned to  and began his practice. , some twenty miles east of  Landing, was the county seat of  County.  office in the courthouse contained little more than a hat rack, a spittoon, a checkerboard and an unsullied Code of . His first two clients were the last two persons hanged in the  County jail.  had urged them to accept the state’s generosity in allowing them to plead Guilty to second-degree murder and escape with their lives, but they were Haverfords, in  County a name synonymous with jackass. The Haverfords had dispatched  leading black in a misunderstanding arising from the alleged wrongful detention of a mare, were imprudent enough to do it in the presence of three witnesses, and insisted that the-son-of-a-bitch-had-it-coming-to-him was a good enough defense for anybody. They persisted in pleading Not Guilty to first-degree murder, so there was nothing much  could do for his clients except be present at their departure, an occasion that was probably the beginning of my father’s profound distaste for the practice of criminal law. During his first five years in ,  practiced economy more than anything; for several years thereafter he invested his earnings in his brother’s education.   was ten years younger than my father, and chose to study medicine at a time when cotton was not worth growing; but after getting Uncle Jack started,  derived a reasonable income from the law. He liked , he was  County born and bred; he knew his people, they knew him, and because of   industry,  was related by blood or marriage to nearly every family in the town.  was an old town, but it was a tired old town when I first knew it. In rainy weather the streets turned to red slop; grass grew on the sidewalks, the courthouse sagged in the square. Somehow, it was hotter then: a black dog suffered on a summer’s day; bony mules hitched to Hoover carts flicked flies in the sweltering shade of the live oaks on the square. Men’s stiff collars wilted by nine in the morning. Ladies bathed before noon, after their three-o’clock naps, and by nightfall were like soft teacakes with frostings of sweat and sweet talcum. People moved slowly then. They ambled across the square, shuffled in and out of the stores around it, took their time about everything. A day was twenty-four hours long but seemed longer. There was no hurry, for there was nowhere to go, nothing to buy and no money to buy it with, nothing to see outside the boundaries of  County. But it was a time of vague optimism for some of the people:  County had recently been told that it had nothing to fear but fear itself. We lived on the main residential street in town—,  and I, plus  our cook.  and I found our father satisfactory: he played with us, read to us, and treated us with courteous detachment.  was something else again. She was all angles and bones; she was nearsighted; she squinted; her hand was wide as a bed slat and twice as hard. She was always ordering me out of the kitchen, asking me why I couldn’t behave as well as  when she knew he was older, and calling me home when I wasn’t ready to come. Our battles were epic and one-sided.  always won, mainly because  always took her side. She had been with us ever since  was born, and I had felt her tyrannical presence as long as I could remember. Our mother died when I was two, so I never felt her absence. She was a from;  met her when he was first elected to the state legislature. He was middle-aged then, she was fifteen years his junior.  was the product of their first year of marriage; four years later I was born, and two years later our mother died from a sudden heart attack. They said it ran in her family. I did not miss her, but I think  did. He remembered her clearly, and sometimes in the middle of a game he would sigh at length, then go off and play by himself behind the car-house. When he was like that, I knew better than to bother him. When I was almost six and  was nearly ten, our summertime boundaries (within calling distance of ) were Mrs. house two doors to the north of us, and the  Place three doors to the south. We were never tempted to break them. The  Place was inhabited by an unknown entity the mere description of whom was enough to make us behave for days on end; Mrs. was plain hell. That was the summer  came to us. Early one morning as we were beginning our day’s play in the back yard,  and I heard something next door in Miss  collard patch. We went to the wire fence to see if there was a puppy— Miss rat terrier was expecting—instead we found someone sitting looking at us. Sitting down, he wasn’t much higher than the collards. We stared at him until he spoke: “Hey.” “Hey yourself,” said  pleasantly. “I’m ,” he said. “I can read.” “So what?” I said. “I just thought you’d like to know I can read. You got anything needs readin’ I can do it....” “How old are you,” asked , “four-and-a-half?” “Goin’ on seven.” “Shoot no wonder, then,” said , jerking his thumb at me. “ been readin’ ever since she was born, and she ain’t even started to school yet. You look right puny for goin’ on seven.” “I’m little but I’m old,” he said.  brushed his hair back to get a better look. “Why don’t you come over, ?” he said. “Lord, what a name.” “ not any funnier’n yours. Aunt  says your name’s  .”  scowled. “I’m big enough to fit mine,” he said. “Your name’s longer’n you are. Bet it’s a foot longer.” “Folks call me ,” said , struggling under the fence. “Do better if you go over it instead of under it,” I said. “Where’d you come from?”  was from Meridian, , was spending the summer with his aunt, Miss , and would be spending every summer in  from now on. His family was from  County originally, his mother worked for a photographer in Meridian, had entered his picture in a Beautiful Child contest and won five dollars. She gave the money to , who went to the picture show twenty times on it. “Don’t have any picture shows here, except ones in the courthouse sometimes,” said . “Ever see anything good?”  had seen , a revelation that moved  to eye him with the beginning of respect. “Tell it to us,” he said.  was a curiosity. He wore blue linen shorts that buttoned to his shirt, his hair was snow white and stuck to his head like duckfluff; he was a year my senior but I towered over him. As he told us the old tale his blue eyes would lighten and darken; his laugh was sudden and happy; he habitually pulled at a cowlick in the center of his forehead. When  reduced  to dust, and  said the show sounded better than the k, I asked  where his father was: “You ain’t said anything about him.” “I haven’t got one.” “Is he dead?” “No...” “Then if he’s not dead you’ve got one, haven’t you?”  blushed and  told me to hush, a sure sign that  had been studied and found acceptable. Thereafter the summer passed in routine contentment. Routine contentment was: improving our treehouse that rested between giant twin chinaberry trees in the back yard, fussing, running through our list of dramas based on the works of. In this matter we were lucky to have . He played the character parts formerly thrust upon me—the ape in, Mr. in The Rover Boys, Mr. in  . Thus we came to know  as a pocket, whose head teemed with eccentric plans, strange longings, and quaint fancies. But by the end of August our repertoire was vapid from countless reproductions, and it was then that  gave us the idea of making  come out. The  Place fascinated . In spite of our warnings and explanations it drew him as the moon draws water, but drew him no nearer than the light-pole on the corner, a safe distance from the  gate. There he would stand, his arm around the fat pole, staring and wondering. The  Place jutted into a sharp curve beyond our house. Walking south, one faced its porch; the sidewalk turned and ran beside the lot. The house was low, was once white with a deep front porch and green shutters, but had long ago darkened to the color of the slate-gray yard around it. Rain-rotted shingles drooped over the eaves of the veranda; oak trees kept the sun away. The remains of a picket drunkenly guarded the front yard—a “swept” yard that was never swept-where son grass and rabbit-tobacco grew in abundance. Inside the house lived a malevolent phan. People said he existed, but  and I had never seen him. People said he went out at night when the moon was down, and peeped in windows. When people’s azaleas froze in a cold snap, it was because he had breathed on them. Any stealthy small crimes committed in  were his work. Once the town was terrorized by a series of morbid nocturnal events: people’s chickens and household pets were found mutilated; although the culprit was Crazy , who eventually drowned himself in , people still looked at the  Place, unwilling to discard their initial suspicions. A Negro would not pass the  Place at night, he would cut across to the sidewalk opposite and whistle as he walked. The  school grounds adjoined the back of the  lot; from the  chickenyard tall pecan trees shook their fruit into the schoolyard, but the nuts lay untouched by the children:  pecans would kill you. A baseball hit into the  yard was a lost ball and no questions asked. The misery of that house began many years before  and I were born. The s, welcome anywhere in town, kept to themselves, a predilection unforgivable in . They did not go to church,  principal recreation, but worshiped at home; Mrs.  seldom if ever crossed the street for a mid-morning coffee break with her neighbors, and certainly never joined a missionary circle. Mr.  walked to town at eleven-thirty every morning and came back promptly at twelve, sometimes carrying a brown paper bag that the neighborhood assumed contained the family groceries. I never knew how old Mr.  made his living— said he “bought cotton,” a polite term for doing nothing—but Mr.  and his wife had lived there with their two sons as long as anybody could remember. The shutters and doors of the  house were closed on Sundays, another thing alien to  ways: closed doors meant illness and cold weather only. Of all days Sunday was the day for formal afternoon visiting: ladies wore corsets, men wore coats, children wore shoes. But to climb the  front steps and call, “He-y,” of a Sunday afternoon was something their neighbors never did. The  house had no screen doors. I once asked  if it ever had any;  said yes, but before I was born. According to neighborhood legend, when the younger  boy was in his teens he became acquainted with some of the from Old Sarum, an enormous and confusing tribe domiciled in the northern part of the county, and they formed the nearest thing to a gang ever seen in . They did little, but enough to be discussed by the town and publicly warned from three pulpits: they hung around the barbershop; they rode the bus to on Sundays and went to the picture show; they attended dances at the county’s riverside gambling hell, the Dew-Drop Inn & Fishing Camp; they experimented with stumphole whiskey. Nobody in  had nerve enough to tell Mr.  that his boy was in with the wrong crowd. One night, in an excessive spurt of high spirits, the boys backed around the square in a borrowed flivver, resisted arrest by  ancient beadle, Mr. , and locked him in the courthouse outhouse. The town decided something had to be done; Mr.  said he knew who each and every one of them was, and he was bound and determined they wouldn’t get away with it, so the boys came before the probate judge on charges of disorderly conduct, disturbing the peace, assault and battery, and using abusive and profane language in the presence and hearing of a female. The judge asked Mr.  why he included the last charge; Mr.  said they cussed so loud he was sure every lady in  heard them. The judge decided to send the boys to the state industrial school, where boys were sometimes sent for no other reason than to provide them with food and decent shelter: it was no prison and it was no disgrace. Mr.  thought it was. If the judge released , Mr.  would see to it that  gave no further trouble. Knowing that Mr.  word was his bond, the judge was glad to do so. The other boys attended the industrial school and received the best secondary education to be had in the state; one of them eventually worked his way through engineering school at . The doors of the  house were closed on weekdays as well as Sundays, and Mr.  boy was not seen again for fifteen years. But there came a day, barely within  memory, when  was heard from and was seen by several people, but not by . He said  never talked much about the s: when  would question him  only answer was for him to mind his own business and let the s mind theirs, they had a right to; but when it happened  said  shook his head and said, “Mm, mm, mm.” So  received most of his information from Miss  , a neighborhood scold, who said she knew the whole thing. According to Miss ,  was sitting in the livingroom cutting some items from The  Tribune to paste in his scrapk. His father entered the room. As Mr.  passed by,  drove the scissors into his parent’s leg, pulled them out, wiped them on his pants, and resumed his activities. Mrs.  ran screaming into the street that  was killing them all, but when the sheriff arrived he found  still sitting in the livingroom, cutting up the Tribune. He was thirty-three years old then. Miss  said old Mr.  said no  was going to any asylum, when it was suggested that a season in  might be helpful to .  wasn’t crazy, he was high-strung at times. It was all right to shut him up, Mr.  conceded, but insisted that  not be charged with anything: he was not a criminal. The sheriff hadn’t the heart to put him in jail alongside Negroes, so  was locked in the courthouse basement.  transition from the basement to back home was nebulous in  memory. Miss   said some of the town council told Mr.  that if he didn’t take  back,  would die of mold from the damp. Besides,  could not live forever on the bounty of the county. Nobody knew what form of intimidation Mr.  employed to keep  out of sight, but  figured that Mr.  kept him chained to the bed most of the time.  said no, it wasn’t that sort of thing, that there were other ways of making people into ghosts. My memory came alive to see Mrs.  occasionally open the front door, walk to the edge of the porch, and pour water on her cs. But every day  and I would see Mr.  walking to and from town. He was a thin leathery man with colorless eyes, so colorless they did not reflect light. His cheekbones were sharp and his mouth was wide, with a thin upper lip and a full lower lip. Miss   said he was so upright he took the word of God as his only law, and we believed her, because Mr.  posture was ramrod straight. He never spoke to us. When he passed we would look at the ground and say, “Good morning, sir,” and he would cough in reply. Mr.  elder son lived in ; he came home at Christmas, and he was one of the few persons we ever saw enter or leave the place. From the day Mr.  took  home, people said the house died. But there came a day when  told us he’d wear us out if we made any noise in the yard and commissioned  to serve in his absence if she heard a sound out of us. Mr.  was dying. He took his time about it. Wooden sawhorses blocked the road at each end of the  lot, straw was put down on the sidewalk, traffic was diverted to the back street. Dr.  parked his car in front of our house and walked to the  every time he called.  and I crept around the yard for days. At last the sawhorses were taken away, and we stood watching from the front porch when Mr.  made his final journey past our house. “There goes the meanest man ever God blew breath into,” murmured , and she spat meditatively into the yard. We looked at her in surprise, for  rarely commented on the ways of white people. The neighborhood thought when Mr.  went under  would come out, but it had another think coming:  elder brother returned from  and took Mr.  place. The only difference between him and his father was their ages.  said Mr.   “bought cotton,” too. Mr.  would speak to us, however, when we said good morning, and sometimes we saw him coming from town with a magazine in his hand. The more we told  about the s, the more he wanted to know, the longer he would stand hugging the light-pole on the corner, the more he would wonder. “Wonder what he does in there,” he would murmur. “Looks like he’d just stick his head out the door.”  said, “He goes out, all right, when it’s pitch dark. Miss   said she woke up in the middle of the night one time and saw him looking straight through the window at her... said his head was like a skull lookin’ at her. Ain’t you ever waked up at night and heard him, ? He walks like this—”  slid his feet through the gravel. “Why do you think Miss  locks up so tight at night? I’ve seen his tracks in our back yard many a mornin’, and one night I heard him scratching on the back screen, but he was gone time  got there.” “Wonder what he looks like?” said .  gave a reasonable description of :  was about six-anda-half feet tall, judging from his tracks; he dined on raw squirrels and any cats he could catch, that’s why his hands were bloodstained—if you ate an animal raw, you could never wash the blood off. There was a long jagged scar that ran across his face; what teeth he had were yellow and rotten; his eyes popped, and he drooled most of the time. “Let’s try to make him come out,” said . “I’d like to see what he looks like.”  said if  wanted to get himself killed, all he had to do was go up and knock on the front door. Our first raid came to pass only because  bet  The Gray Ghost against two  Swifts that  wouldn’t get any farther than the  gate. In all his life,  had never declined a dare.  thought about it for three days. I suppose he loved honor more than his head, for  wore him down easily: “You’re scared,”  said, the first day. “Ain’t scared, just respectful,”  said. The next day  said, “You’re too scared even to put your big toe in the front yard.”  said he reckoned he wasn’t, he’d passed the  Place every school day of his life. “Always runnin’,” I said. But  got him the third day, when he told  that folks in Meridian certainly weren’t as afraid as the folks in , that he’d never seen such scary folks as the ones in . This was enough to make  march to the corner, where he stopped and leaned against the light-pole, watching the gate hanging crazily on its homemade hinge. “I hope you’ve got it through your head that he’ll kill us each and every one,  ,” said , when we joined him. “Don’t blame me when he gouges your eyes out. You started it, remember.” “You’re still scared,” murmured  patiently.  wanted  to know once and for all that he wasn’t scared of anything: “It’s just that I can’t think of a way to make him come out without him gettin’ us.” Besides,  had his little sister to think of. When he said that, I knew he was afraid.  had his little sister to think of the time I dared him to jump off the top of the house: “If I got killed, what’d become of you?” he asked. Then he jumped, landed unhurt, and his sense of responsibility left him until confronted by the  Place. “You gonna run out on a dare?” asked . “If you are, then—” “, you have to think about these things,”  said. “Lemme think a minute... it’s sort of like making a turtle come out...” “How’s that?” asked . “Strike a match under him.” I told  if he set fire to the  house I was going to tell  on him.  said striking a match under a turtle was hateful. “Ain’t hateful, just persuades him—‘s not like you’d chunk him in the fire,”  growled. “How do you know a match don’t hurt him?” “Turtles can’t feel, stupid,” said . “Were you ever a turtle, huh?” “My stars, ! Now lemme think... reckon we can rock him....”  stood in thought so long that  made a mild concession: “I won’t say you ran out on a dare an’ I’ll swap you The Gray Ghost if you just go up and touch the house.”  brightened. “Touch the house, that all?”  nodded. “Sure that’s all, now? I don’t want you hollerin’ something different the minute I get back.” “Yeah, that’s all,” said . “He’ll probably come out after you when he sees you in the yard, then ’n’ me’ll jump on him and hold him down till we can tell him we ain’t gonna hurt him.” We left the corner, crossed the side street that ran in front of the  house, and stopped at the gate. “Well go on,” said , “ and me’s right behind you.” “I’m going,” said , “don’t hurry me.” He walked to the corner of the lot, then back again, studying the simple terrain as if deciding how best to effect an entry, frowning and scratching his head. Then I sneered at him.  threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slapped it with his palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foray was successful.  and I followed on his heels. Safely on our porch, panting and out of breath, we looked back. The old house was the same, droopy and sick, but as we stared down the street we thought we saw an inside shutter move. MANY YEARS LATER, as he faced the firing squad, Colonel  was to remember that distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. At that time  was a village of twenty adobe houses, built on the bank of a river of clear water that ran along a bed of polished stones, which were white and enormous, like prehistoric eggs. The world was so recent that many things lacked names, and in order to indicate them it was necessary to point. Every year during the month of March a family of ragged gypsies would set up their tents near the village, and with a great uproar of pipes and kettledrums they would display new inventions. First they brought the magnet. A heavy gypsy with an untamed beard and sparrow hands, who introduced himself as , put on a bold public demonstration of what he himself called the eighth wonder of the learned alchemists of Macedonia. He went from house to house dragging two metal ingots and everybody was amazed to see pots, pans, tongs, and braziers tumble down from their places and beams creak from the desperation of nails and screws trying to emerge, and even objects that had been lost for a long time appeared from where they had been searched for most and went dragging along in turbulent confusion behind  magical irons. “Things have a life of their own,” the gypsy proclaimed with a harsh accent. “It’s simply a matter of waking up their souls.”   , whose unbridled imagination always went beyond the genius of nature and even beyond miracles and magic, thought that it would be possible to make use of that useless invention to extract gold from the bowels of the earth. , who was an honest man, warned him: “It won’t work for that.” But    at that time did not believe in the honesty of gypsies, so he traded his mule and a pair of goats for the two magnetized ingots.  , his wife, who relied on those animals to increase their poor domestic holdings, was unable to dissuade him. “Very soon we’ll have gold enough and more to pave the floors of the house,” her husband replied. For several months he worked hard to demonstrate the truth of his idea. He explored every inch of the region, even the riverbed, dragging the two iron ingots along and reciting  incantation aloud. The only thing he succeeded in doing was to unearth a suit of fifteenth-century armor which had all of its pieces soldered together with rust and inside of which there was the hollow resonance of an enormous stone-filled gourd. When    and the four men of his expedition managed to take the armor apart, they found inside a calcified skeleton with a copper locket containing a woman’s hair around its neck. In March the gypsies returned. This time they brought a telescope and a magnifying glass the size of a drum, which they exhibited as the latest discovery of the Jews of . They placed a gypsy woman at one end of the village and set up the telescope at the entrance to the tent. For the price of five reales, people could look into the telescope and see the gypsy woman an arm’s length away. “Science has eliminated distance,”  proclaimed. “In a short time, man will be able to see what is happening in any place in the world without leaving his own house.” A burning noonday sun brought out a startling demonstration with the gigantic magnifying glass: they put a pile of dry hay in the middle of the street and set it on fire by concentrating the sun’s rays.   , who had still not been consoled for the failure of his magnets, conceived the idea of using that invention as a weapon of war. Again  tried to dissuade him, but he finally accepted the two magnetized ingots and three colonial coins in exchange for the magnifying glass.  wept in consternation. That money was from a chest of gold coins that her father had put together over an entire life of privation and that she had buried underneath her bed in hopes of a proper occasion to make use of it.    made no attempt to console her, completely absorbed in his tactical experiments with the abnegation of a scientist and even at the risk of his own life. In an attempt to show the effects of the glass on enemy troops, he exposed himself to the concentration of the sun’s rays and suffered burns which turned into sores that took a long time to heal. Over the protests of his wife, who was alarmed at such a dangerous invention, at one point he was ready to set the house on fire. He would spend hours on end in his room, calculating the strategic possibilities of his novel weapon until he succeeded in putting together a manual of startling instructional clarity and an irresistible power of conviction. He sent it to the government, accompanied by numerous descriptions of his experiments and several pages of explanatory sketches, by a messenger who crossed the mountains, got lost in measureless swamps, forded stormy rivers, and was on the point of perishing under the lash of despair, plague, and wild beasts until he found a route that joined the one used by the mules that carried the mail. In spite of the fact that a trip to the capital was little less than impossible at that time,    promised to undertake it as soon as the government ordered him to so that he could put on some practical demonstrations of his invention for the military authorities and could train them himself in the complicated art of solar war. For several years he waited for an answer. Finally, tired of waiting, he bemoaned to  the failure of his project and the gypsy then gave him a convincing proof of his honesty: he gave him back the doubloons in exchange for the magnifying glass, and he left him in addition some Portuguese maps and several instruments of navigation. In his own handwriting he set down a concise synthesis of the studies by Monk, which he left   so that he would be able to make use of the astrolabe, the compass, and the sextant.    spent the long months of the rainy season shut up in a small room that he had built in the rear of the house so that no one would disturb his experiments. Having completely abandoned his domestic obligations, he spent entire nights in the courtyard watching the course of the stars and he almost contracted sunstroke from trying to establish an exact method to ascertain noon. When he became an expert in the use and manipulation of his instruments, he conceived a notion of space that allowed him to navigate across unknown seas, to visit uninhabited territories, and to establish relations with splendid beings without having to leave his study. That was the period in which he acquired the habit of talking to himself, of walking through the house without paying attention to anyone, as  and the children broke their backs in the garden, growing banana and caladium, cassava and yams, ahuyama roots and eggplants. Suddenly, without warning, his feverish activity was interrupted and was replaced by a kind of fascination. He spent several days as if he were bewitched, softly repeating to himself a string of fearful conjectures without giving credit to his own understanding. Finally, one Tuesday in December, at lunchtime, all at once he released the whole weight of his torment. The children would remember for the rest of their lives the august solemnity with which their father, devastated by his prolonged vigil and by the wrath of his imagination, revealed his discovery to them: “The earth is round, like an orange.”  lost her patience. “If you have to go crazy, please go crazy all by yourself!” she shouted. “But don’t try to put your gypsy ideas into the heads of the children.”   , impassive, did not let himself be frightened by the desperation of his wife, who, in a seizure of rage, smashed the astrolabe against the floor. He built another one, he gathered the men of the village in his little room, and he demonstrated to them, with theories that none of them could understand, the possibility of returning to where one had set out by consistently sailing east. The whole village was convinced that    had lost his reason, when  returned to set things straight. He gave public praise to the intelligence of a man who from pure astronomical speculation had evolved a theory that had already been proved in practice, although unknown in until then, and as a proof of his admiration he made him a gift that was to have a profound influence on the future of the village: the laboratory of an alchemist. By then  had aged with surprising rapidity. On his first trips he seemed to be the same age as   . But while the latter had preserved his extraordinary strength, which permitted him to pull down a horse by grabbing its ears, the gypsy seemed to have been worn down by some tenacious illness. It was, in reality, the result of multiple and rare diseases contracted on his innumerable trips around the world. According to what he himself said as he spoke to    while helping him set up the laboratory, death followed him everywhere, sniffing at the cuffs of his pants, but never deciding to give him the final clutch of its claws. He was a fugitive from all the plagues and catastrophes that had ever lashed mankind. He had survived pellagra in , scurvy in the  archipelago, leprosy in , beriberi in , bubonic plague in , an earthquake in , and a disastrous shipwreck in the Strait of . That prodigious creature, said to possess the keys of, was a gloomy man, enveloped in a sad aura, with an Asiatic look that seemed to know what there was on the other side of things. He wore a large black hat that looked like a raven with widespread wings, and a velvet vest across which the patina of the centuries had skated. But in spite of his immense wisdom and his mysterious breadth, he had a human burden, an earthly condition that kept him involved in the small problems of daily life. He would complain of the ailments of old age, he suffered from the most insignificant economic difficulties, and he had stopped laughing a long time back because scurvy had made his teeth drop out. On that suffocating noontime when the gypsy revealed his secrets,    had the certainty that it was the beginning of a great friendship. The children were startled by his fantastic stories. , who could not have been more than five at the time, would remember him for the rest of his life as he saw him that afternoon, sitting against the metallic and quivering light from the window, lighting up with his deep organ voice the darkest reaches of the imagination, while down over his temples there flowed the grease that was being melted by the heat.  , his older brother, would pass on that wonderful image as a hereditary memory to all of his descendants. , on the other hand, held a bad memory of that visit, for she had entered the room just as  had carelessly broken a flask of bichloride of mercury. “It’s the smell of the devil,” she said. “Not at all,”  corrected her. “It has been proven that the devil has sulphuric properties and this is just a little corrosive sublimate.” Always didactic, he went into a learned exposition of the diabolical properties of cinnabar, but  paid no attention to him, although she took the children off to pray. That biting odor would stay forever in her mind linked to the memory of . The rudimentary laboratory—in addition to a profusion of pots, funnels, retorts, filters, and sieves —was made up of a primitive water pipe, a glass beaker with a long, thin neck, a reproduction of the philosopher’s egg, and a still the gypsies themselves had built in accordance with modern descriptions of the three-armed alembic of Mary the Jew. Along with those items,  left samples of the seven metals that corresponded to the seven planets, the formulas of and for doubling the quantity of gold, and a set of notes and sketches concerning the processes of the Great Teaching that would permit those who could interpret them to undertake the manufacture of the philosopher’s stone. Seduced by the simplicity of the formulas to double the quantity of gold,    paid court to  for several weeks so that she would let him dig up her colonial coins and increase them by as many times as it was possible to subdivide mercury.  gave in, as always, to her husband’s unyielding obstinacy. Then    threw three doubloons into a pan and fused them with copper filings, orpiment, brimstone, and lead. He put it all to boil in a pot of castor oil until he got a thick and pestilential syrup which was more like common caramel than valuable gold. In risky and desperate processes of distillation, melted with the seven planetary metals, mixed with hermetic mercury and vitriol of, and put back to cook in hog fat for lack of any radish oil,  precious inheritance was reduced to a large piece of burnt hog cracklings that was firmly stuck to the bot of the pot. When the gypsies came back,  had turned the whole population of the village against them. But curiosity was greater than fear, for that time the gypsies went about the town making a deafening noise with all manner of musical instruments while a hawker announced the exhibition of the most fabulous discovery of the Naciancenes. So that everyone went to the tent and by paying one cent they saw a youthful , recovered, unwrinkled, with a new and flashing set of teeth. Those who remembered his gums that had been destroyed by scurvy, his flaccid cheeks, and his withered lips trembled with fear at the final proof of the gypsy’s supernatural power. The fear turned into panic when  took out his teeth, intact, encased in their gums, and showed them to the audience for an instant—a fleeting instant in which he went back to being the same decrepit man of years past—and put them back again and smiled once more with the full control of his restored youth. Even    himself considered that  knowledge had reached unbearable extremes, but he felt a healthy excitement when the gypsy explained to him alone the workings of his false teeth. It seemed so simple and so prodigious at the same time that overnight he lost all interest in his experiments in alchemy. He underwent a new crisis of bad humor. He did not go back to eating regularly, and he would spend the day walking through the house. “Incredible things are happening in the world,” he said to . “Right there across the river there are all kinds of magical instruments while we keep on living like donkeys.” Those who had known him since the foundation of  were startled at how much he had changed under  influence. At first    had been a kind of youthful patriarch who would give instructions for planting and advice for the raising of children and animals, and who collaborated with everyone, even in the physical work, for the welfare of the community. Since his house from the very first had been the best in the village, the others had been built in its image and likeness. It had a small, welllighted living room, a dining room in the shape of a terrace with gaily colored flowers, two bedrooms, a courtyard with a gigantic chestnut tree, a well-kept garden, and a corral where goats, pigs, and hens lived in peaceful communion. The only animals that were prohibited, not just in his house but in the entire settlement, were fighting cocks.  capacity for work was the same as that of her husband. Active, small, severe, that woman of unbreakable nerves who at no moment in her life had been heard to sing seemed to be everywhere, from dawn until quite late at night, always pursued by the soft whispering of her stiff, starched petticoats. Thanks to her the floors of tamped earth, the unwhitewashed mud walls, the rustic, wooden furniture they had built themselves were always clean, and the old chests where they kept their clothes exhaled the warm smell of basil.   , who was the most enterprising man ever to be seen in the village, had set up the placement of the houses in such a way that from all of them one could reach the river and draw water with the same effort, and he had lined up the streets with such good sense that no house got more sun than another during the hot time of day. Within a few years  was a village that was more orderly and hard-working than any known until then by its three hundred inhabitants. It was a truly happy village where no one was over thirty years of age and where no one had died. Since the time of its founding,    had built traps and cages. In a short time he filled not only his own house but all of those in the village with troupials, canaries, bee eaters, and redbreasts. The concert of so many different birds became so disturbing that  would plug her ears with beeswax so as not to lose her sense of reality. The first time that  tribe arrived, selling glass balls for headaches, everyone was surprised that they had been able to find that village lost in the drowsiness of the swamp, and the gypsies confessed that they had found their way by the song of the birds. That spirit of social initiative disappeared in a short time, pulled away by the fever of the magnets, the astronomical calculations, the dreams of transmutation, and the urge to discover the wonders of the world. From a clean and active man,    changed into a man lazy in appearance, careless in his dress, with a wild beard that  managed to trim with great effort and a kitchen knife. There were many who considered him the victim of some strange spell. But even those most convinced of his madness left work and family to follow him when he brought out his tools to clear the land and asked the assembled group to open a way that would put  in contact with the great inventions.    was completely ignorant of the geography of the region. He knew that to the east there lay an impenetrable mountain chain and that on the other side of the mountains there was the ancient city of, where in times past—according to what he had been told by the first , his grandfather—Sir had gone crocodile hunting with cannons and that he repaired them and stuffed them with straw to bring to Queen . In his youth,    and his men, with wives and children, animals and all kinds of domestic implements, had crossed the mountains in search of an outlet to the sea, and after twentysix months they gave up the expedition and founded , so they would not have to go back. It was, therefore, a route that did not interest him, for it could lead only to the past. To the south lay the swamps, covered with an eternal vegetable scum, and the whole vast universe of the great swamp, which, according to what the gypsies said, had no limits. The great swamp in the west mingled with a boundless extension of water where there were soft-skinned cetaceans that had the head and torso of a woman, causing the ruination of sailors with the charm of their extraordinary breasts. The gypsies sailed along that route for six months before they reached the strip of land over which the mules that carried the mail passed. According to    calculations, the only possibility of contact with civilization lay along the northern route. So he handed out clearing tools and hunting weapons to the same men who had been with him during the founding of . He threw his directional instruments and his maps into a knapsack, and he undertook the reckless adventure. During the first days they did not come across any appreciable obstacle. They went down along the stony bank of the river to the place where years before they had found the soldier’s armor, and from there they went into the woods along a path between wild orange trees. At the end of the first week they killed and roasted a deer, but they agreed to eat only half of it and salt the rest for the days that lay ahead. With that precaution they tried to postpone the necessity of having to eat macaws, whose blue flesh had a harsh and musky taste. Then, for more than ten days, they did not see the sun again. The ground became soft and damp, like volcanic ash, and the vegetation was thicker and thicker, and the cries of the birds and the uproar of the monkeys became more and more remote, and the world became eternally sad. The men on the expedition felt overwhelmed by their most ancient memories in that paradise of dampness and silence, going back to before original sin, as their ts sank into pools of steaming oil and their machetes destroyed bloody lilies and golden salamanders. For a week, almost without speaking, they went ahead like sleepwalkers through a universe of grief, lighted only by the tenuous reflection of luminous insects, and their lungs were overwhelmed by a suffocating smell of blood. They could not return because the strip that they were opening as they went along would soon close up with a new vegetation that almost seemed to grow before their eyes. “It’s all right,”    would say. “The main thing is not to lose our bearings.” Always following his compass, he kept on guiding his men toward the invisible north so that they would be able to get out of that enchanted region. It was a thick night, starless, but the darkness was becoming impregnated with a fresh and clear air. Exhausted by the long crossing, they hung up their hammocks and slept deeply for the first time in two weeks. When they woke up, with the sun already high in the sky, they were speechless with fascination. Before them, surrounded by ferns and palm trees, white and powdery in the silent morning light, was an enormous Spanish galleon. Tilted slightly to the starboard, it had hanging from its intact masts the dirty rags of its sails in the midst of its rigging, which was adorned with orchids. The hull, covered with an armor of petrified barnacles and soft moss, was firmly fastened into a surface of stones. The whole structure seemed to occupy its own space, one of solitude and oblivion, protected from the vices of time and the habits of the birds. Inside, where the expeditionaries explored with careful intent, there was nothing but a thick forest of flowers. The discovery of the galleon, an indication of the proximity of the sea, broke    drive. He considered it a trick of his whimsical fate to have searched for the sea without finding it, at the cost of countless sacrifices and suffering, and to have found it all of a sudden without looking for it, as if it lay across his path like an insurmountable object. Many years later Colonel  crossed the region again, when it was already a regular mail route, and the only part of the ship he found was its burned-out frame in the midst of a field of poppies. Only then, convinced that the story had not been some product of his father’s imagination, did he wonder how the galleon had been able to get inland to that spot. But    did not concern himself with that when he found the sea after another four days’ journey from the galleon. It was a bright cold day in April, and the clocks were striking thirteen. his chin nuzzled into his breast in an effort to escape the vile wind, slipped quickly through the glass doors of Victory Mansions, though not quickly enough to prevent a swirl of gritty dust from entering along with him. The hallway smelt of boiled cabbage and old rag mats. At one end of it a coloured poster, too large for indoor display, had been tacked to the wall. It depicted simply an enormous face, more than a metre wide: the face of a man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome features.  made for the stairs. It was no use trying the lift. Even at the best of times it was seldom working, and at present the electric current was cut off during daylight hours. It was part of the economy drive in preparation for Hate Week. The flat was seven flights up, and , who was thirty-nine and had a varicose ulcer above his right ankle, went slowly, resting several times on the way. On each landing, opposite the lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It was one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran. Inside the flat a fruity voice was reading out a list of fig- ures which had something to do with the production of pig-iron. The voice came from an oblong metal plaque like a dulled mirror which formed part of the surface of the right-hand wall.  turned a switch and the voice sank somewhat, though the words were still distinguishable. The instrument (the telescreen, it was called) could be dimmed, but there was no way of shutting it off completely. He moved over to the window: a smallish, frail figure, the meagreness of his body merely emphasized by the blue overalls which were the uniform of the party. His hair was very fair, his face naturally sanguine, his skin roughened by coarse soap and blunt razor blades and the cold of the winter that had just ended. Outside, even through the shut window-pane, the world looked cold. Down in the street little eddies of wind were whirling dust and torn paper into spirals, and though the sun was shining and the sky a harsh blue, there seemed to be no colour in anything, except the posters that were plastered everywhere. The blackmoustachio’d face gazed down from every commanding corner. There was one on the house-front immediately opposite. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption said, while the dark eyes looked deep into  own. Down at street level another poster, torn at one corner, flapped fitfully in the wind, alternately covering and uncovering the single word. In the far distance a helicopter skimmed down between the roofs, hovered for an instant like a bluebottle, and darted away again with a curving flight. It was the police patrol, snooping into people’s windows. The patrols did not matter, however. Only the Thought Police mattered. Behind  back the voice from the telescreen was still babbling away about pig-iron and the overfulfilment of the Ninth Three-Year Plan. The telescreen received and transmitted simultaneously. Any sound that  made, above the level of a very low whisper, would be picked up by it, moreover, so long as he remained within the field of vision which the metal plaque commanded, he could be seen as well as heard. There was of course no way of knowing whether you were being watched at any given moment. How often, or on what system, the Thought Police plugged in on any individual wire was guesswork. It was even conceivable that they watched everybody all the time. But at any rate they could plug in your wire whenever they wanted to. You had to live—did live, from habit that became instinct—in the assumption that every sound you made was overheard, and, except in darkness, every movement scrutinized.  kept his back turned to the telescreen. It was safer, though, as he well knew, even a back can be revealing. A kilometre away the Ministry of Truth, his place of work, towered vast and white above the grimy landscape. This, he thought with a sort of vague distaste—this was London, chief city of Airstrip One, itself the third most populous of the provinces of . He tried to squeeze out some childhood memory that should tell him whether had always been quite like this. Were there always these vistas of rotting nineteenth-century houses, their sides shored up with baulks of timber, their windows patched with cardboard and their roofs with corrugated iron, their crazy garden walls sagging in all directions? And the bombed sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the willow-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chicken-houses? But it was no use, he could not remember: nothing remained of his childhood except a series of brightlit tableaux occurring against no background and mostly unintelligible. The Ministry of Truth—Minitrue, in Newspeak [Newspeak was the official language of . For an account of its structure and etymology see Appendix.]—was startlingly different from any other object in sight. It was an enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white concrete, soaring up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the air. From where  stood it was just possible to read, picked out on its white face in elegant lettering, the three slogans of the Party: WAR IS PEACE FREEDOM IS SLAVERY IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three thousand rooms above ground level, and corresponding ramifications below. Scattered about London there were just three other buildings of similar appearance and size. So completely did they dwarf the surrounding architecture that from the roof of Victory Mansions you could see all four of them simultaneously. They were the homes of the four Ministries between which the entire apparatus of government was divided. The Ministry of Truth, which concerned itself with news, entertainment, education, and the fine arts. The Ministry of Peace, which concerned itself with war. The Ministry of Love, which maintained law and order. And the Ministry of Plenty, which was responsible for economic affairs. Their names, in Newspeak: Minitrue, Minipax, Miniluv, and Miniplenty. The Ministry of Love was the really frightening one. There were no windows in it at all.  had never been inside the Ministry of Love, nor within half a kilometre of it. It was a place impossible to enter except on official business, and then only by penetrating through a maze of barbedwire entanglements, steel doors, and hidden machine-gun nests. Even the streets leading up to its outer barriers were roamed by gorilla-faced guards in black uniforms, armed with jointed truncheons.  turned round abruptly. He had set his features into the expression of quiet optimism which it was advisable to wear when facing the telescreen. He crossed the room into the tiny kitchen. By leaving the Ministry at this time of day he had sacrificed his lunch in the canteen, and he was aware that there was no food in the kitchen except a hunk of dark-coloured bread which had got to be saved for orrow’s breakfast. He took down from the shelf a bottle of colourless liquid with a plain white label marked VICTORY GIN. It gave off a sickly, oily smell, as of Chinese rice-spirit.  poured out nearly a teacupful, nerved himself for a shock, and gulped it down like a dose of medicine. Instantly his face turned scarlet and the water ran out of his eyes. The stuff was like nitric acid, and moreover, in swallowing it one had the sensation of being hit on the back of the head with a rubber club. The next moment, however, the burning in his belly died down and the world began to look more cheerful. He took a cigarette from a crumpled packet marked VICTORY CIGARETTES and incautiously held it upright, whereupon the tobacco fell out on to the floor. With the next he was more successful. He went back to the living-room and sat down at a small table that stood to the left of the telescreen. From the table drawer he took out a penholder, a bottle of ink, and a thick, quarto-sized blank k with a red back and a marbled cover. For some reason the telescreen in the living-room was in an unusual position. Instead of being placed, as was normal, in the end wall, where it could command the whole room, it was in the longer wall, opposite the window. To one side of it there was a shallow alcove in which  was now sitting, and which, when the flats were built, had probably been intended to hold. By sitting in the alcove, and keeping well back,  was able to remain outside the range of the telescreen, so far as sight went. He could be heard, of course, but so long as he stayed in his present position he could not be seen. It was partly the unusual geography of the room that had suggested to him the thing that he was now about to do. But it had also been suggested by the k that he had just taken out of the drawer. It was a peculiarly beautiful k. Its smooth creamy paper, a little yellowed by age, was of a kind that had not been manufactured for at least forty years past. He could guess, however, that the k was much older than that. He had seen it lying in the window of a frowsy little junk-shop in a slummy quarter of the town (just what quarter he did not now remember) and had been stricken immediately by an overwhelming desire to possess it. Party members were supposed not to go into ordinary shops (’dealing on the free market’, it was called), but the rule was not strictly kept, because there were various things, such as shoelaces and razor blades, which it was impossible to get hold of in any other way. He had given a quick glance up and down the street and then had slipped inside and bought the k for two dollars fifty. At the time he was not conscious of wanting it for any particular purpose. He had carried it guiltily home in his briefcase. Even with nothing written in it, it was a compromising possession. The thing that he was about to do was to open a diary. This was not illegal (nothing was illegal, since there were no longer any laws), but if detected it was reasonably certain that it would be punished by death, or at least by twentyfive years in a forced-labour camp.  fitted a nib into the penholder and sucked it to get the grease off. The pen was an archaic instrument, seldom used even for signatures, and he had procured one, furtively and with some difficulty, simply because of a feeling that the beautiful creamy paper deserved to be written on with a real nib instead of being scratched with an ink-pencil. Actually he was not used to writing by hand. Apart from very short notes, it was usual to dictate everything into the speak-write which was of course impossible for his present purpose. He dipped the pen into the ink and then faltered for just a second. A tremor had gone through his bowels. To mark the paper was the decisive act. In small clumsy letters he wrote: April 4th, 1984. He sat back. A sense of complete helplessness had descended upon him. To begin with, he did not know with any certainty that this was 1984. It must be round about that date, since he was fairly sure that his age was thirty-nine, and he believed that he had been born in 1944 or 1945; but it was never possible nowadays to pin down any date within a year or two. For whom, it suddenly occurred to him to wonder, was he writing this diary? For the future, for the unborn. His mind hovered for a moment round the doubtful date on the page, and then fetched up with a bump against the Newspeak word DOUBLETHINK. For the first time the magnitude of what he had undertaken came home to him. How could you communicate with the future? It was of its nature impossible. Either the future would resemble the present, in which case it would not listen to him: or it would be different from it, and his predicament would be meaningless. For some time he sat gazing stupidly at the paper. The telescreen had changed over to strident military music. It was curious that he seemed not merely to have lost the pow-er of expressing himself, but even to have forgotten what it was that he had originally intended to say. For weeks past he had been making ready for this moment, and it had never crossed his mind that anything would be needed except courage. The actual writing would be easy. All he had to do was to transfer to paper the interminable restless monologue that had been running inside his head, literally for years. At this moment, however, even the monologue had dried up. Moreover his varicose ulcer had begun itching unbearably. He dared not scratch it, because if he did so it always became inflamed. The seconds were ticking by. He was conscious of nothing except the blankness of the page in front of him, the itching of the skin above his ankle, the blaring of the music, and a slight ziness caused by the gin. Suddenly he began writing in sheer panic, only imperfectly aware of what he was setting down. His small but childish handwriting straggled up and down the page, shedding first its capital letters and finally even its full stops: April 4th, 1984. Last night to the flicks. All war films. One very good one of a ship full of refugees being bombed somewhere in the Mediterranean. Audience much amused by shots of a great huge fat man trying to swim away with a helicopter after him, first you saw him wallowing along in the water like a porpoise, then you saw him through the helicopters gunsights, then he was full of holes and the sea round him turned pink and he sank as suddenly as though the holes had let in the water, audience shouting with laughter when he sank. then you saw a lifeboat full of children with a helicopter hovering over it. there was a middle-aged woman might have been a jewess sitting up in the bow with a little boy about three years old in her arms. little boy screaming with fright and hiding his head between her breasts as if he was trying to burrow right into her and the woman putting her arms round him and comforting him although she was blue with fright herself, all the time covering him up as much as possible as if she thought her arms could keep the bullets off him. then the helicopter planted a 20 kilo bomb in among them terrific flash and the boat went all to matchwood. then there was a wonderful shot of a child’s arm going up up up right up into the air a helicopter with a camera in its nose must have followed it up and there was a lot of applause from the party seats but a woman down in the prole part of the house suddenly started kicking up a fuss and shouting they didnt oughter of showed it not in front of kids they didnt it aint right not in front of kids it aint until the police turned her turned her out i dont suppose anything happened to her nobody cares what the proles say typical prole reaction they never——  stopped writing, partly because he was suffering from cramp. He did not know what had made him pour out this stream of rubbish. But the curious thing was that while he was doing so a totally different memory had clarified itself in his mind, to the point where he almost felt equal to writing it down. It was, he now realized, because of this other incident that he had suddenly decided to come home and begin the diary today. It had happened that morning at the Ministry, if anything so nebulous could be said to happen. It was nearly eleven hundred, and in the Records Department, where  worked, they were dragging the chairs out of the cubicles and grouping them in the centre of the hall opposite the big telescreen, in preparation for the Two Minutes Hate.  was just taking his place in one of the middle rows when two people whom he knew by sight, but had never spoken to, came unexpectedly into the room. One of them was a girl whom he often passed in the corridors. He did not know her name, but he knew that she worked in the Fiction Department. Presumably—since he had sometimes seen her with oily hands and carrying a spanner—she had some mechanical job on one of the novel-writing machines. She was a bold-looking girl, of about twenty-seven, with thick hair, a freckled face, and swift, athletic movements. A narrow scarlet sash, emblem of the Junior Anti-Sex League, was wound several times round the waist of her overalls, just tightly enough to bring out the shapeliness of her hips.  had disliked her from the very first moment of seeing her. He knew the reason. It was because of the atmosphere of hockey-fields and cold baths and community hikes and general clean-mindedness which she managed to carry about with her. He disliked nearly all women, and especially the young and pretty ones. It was always the women, and above all the young ones, who were the most bigoted adherents of the Party, the swallowers of slogans, the amateur spies and nosers-out of unortho-doxy. But this particular girl gave him the impression of being more dangerous than most. Once when they passed in the corridor she gave him a quick sidelong glance which seemed to pierce right into him and for a moment had filled him with black terror. The idea had even crossed his mind that she might be an agent of the Thought Police. That, it was true, was very unlikely. Still, he continued to feel a peculiar uneasiness, which had fear mixed up in it as well as hostility, whenever she was anywhere near him. The other person was a man named , a member of the Inner Party and holder of some post so important and remote that  had only a dim idea of its nature. A momentary hush passed over the group of people round the chairs as they saw the black overalls of an Inner Party member approaching.  was a large, burly man with a thick neck and a coarse, humorous, brutal face. In spite of his formidable appearance he had a certain charm of manner. He had a trick of resettling his spectacles on his nose which was curiously disarming—in some indefinable way, curiously civilized. It was a gesture which, if anyone had still thought in such terms, might have recalled an eighteenth-century nobleman offering his snuffbox.  had seen  perhaps a dozen times in almost as many years. He felt deeply drawn to him, and not solely because he was intrigued by the contrast between  urbane manner and his prize-fighter’s physique. Much more it was because of a secretly held belief—or perhaps not even a belief, merely a hope—that  political orthodoxy was not perfect. Something in his face suggested it irresistibly. And again, perhaps it was not even unorthodoxy that was written in his face, but simply intelligence. But at any rate he had the appearance of being a person that you could talk to if somehow you could cheat the telescreen and get him alone.  had never made the smallest effort to verify this guess: indeed, there was no way of doing so. At this moment  glanced at his wrist-watch, saw that it was nearly eleven hundred, and evidently decided to stay in the Records Department until the Two Minutes Hate was over. He took a chair in the same row as , a couple of places away. A small, sandy-haired woman who worked in the next cubicle to  was between them. The girl with dark hair was sitting immediately behind. The next moment a hideous, grinding speech, as of some monstrous machine running without oil, burst from the big telescreen at the end of the room. It was a noise that set one’s teeth on edge and bristled the hair at the back of one’s neck. The Hate had started. As usual, the face of, the Enemy of the People, had flashed on to the screen. There were hisses here and there among the audience. The little sandy-haired woman gave a squeak of mingled fear and disgust.  was the renegade and backslider who once, long ago (how long ago, nobody quite remembered), had been one of the leading figures of the Party, almost on a level with Big Brother himself, and then had engaged in counter-revolutionary activities, had been condemned to death, and had mysteriously escaped and disappeared. The programmes of the Two Minutes Hate varied from day to day, but there was none in which  was not the principal figure. He was the primal traitor, the earliest defiler of the Party’s purity. All subsequent crimes against the Party, all treacheries, acts of sabotage, heresies, deviations, sprang directly out of his teaching. Somewhere or other he was still alive and hatching his conspiracies: perhaps somewhere beyond the sea, under the protection of his foreign paymasters, perhaps even—so it was occasionally rumoured—in some hidingplace in  itself.  diaphragm was constricted. He could never see the face of  without a painful mixture of emotions. It was a lean Jewish face, with a great fuzzy aureole of white hair and a small goatee beard—a clever face, and yet somehow inherently despicable, with a kind of senile silliness in the long thin nose, near the end of which a pair of spectacles was perched. It resembled the face of a sheep, and the voice, too, had a sheep-like quality.  was delivering his usual venomous attack upon the doctrines of the Party—an attack so exaggerated and perverse that a child should have been able to see through it, and yet just plausible enough to fill one with an alarmed feeling that other people, less level-headed than oneself, might be taken in by it. He was abusing Big Brother, he was denouncing the dictatorship of the Party, he was demanding the immediate conclusion of peace with Eurasia, he was advocating freedom of speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of assembly, freedom of thought, he was crying hysterically that the revolution had been betrayed—and all this in rapid polysyllabic speech which was a sort of parody of the ha-bitual style of the orators of the Party, and even contained Newspeak words: more Newspeak words, indeed, than any Party member would normally use in real life. And all the while, lest one should be in any doubt as to the reality which  specious claptrap covered, behind his head on the telescreen there marched the endless columns of the Eurasian army—row after row of solid-looking men with expressionless Asiatic faces, who swam up to the surface of the screen and vanished, to be replaced by others exactly similar. The dull rhythmic tramp of the soldiers’ ts formed the background to  bleating voice. Before the Hate had proceeded for thirty seconds, uncontrollable exclamations of rage were breaking out from half the people in the room. The self-satisfied sheep-like face on the screen, and the terrifying power of the Eurasian army behind it, were too much to be borne: besides, the sight or even the thought of  produced fear and anger auatically. He was an object of hatred more constant than either Eurasia or Eastasia, since when  was at war with one of these Powers it was generally at peace with the other. But what was strange was that although  was hated and despised by everybody, although every day and a thousand times a day, on platforms, on the telescreen, in newspapers, in ks, his theories were refuted, smashed, ridiculed, held up to the general gaze for the pitiful rubbish that they were—in spite of all this, his influence never seemed to grow less. Always there were fresh dupes waiting to be seduced by him. A day never passed when spies and saboteurs acting under his directions were not unmasked In my younger and more vulnerable years my father gave me some advice that I’ve been turning over in my mind ever since ‘Whenever you feel like criticizing any one,’ he told me, ‘just remember that all the people in this world haven’t had the advantages that you’ve had.’ He didn’t say any more but we’ve always been unusually communicative in a reserved way, and I understood that he meant a great deal more than that. In consequence I’m inclined to reserve all judgments, a habit that has opened up many curious natures to me and also made me the victim of not a few veteran bores. The abnormal mind is quick to detect and attach itself to this quality when it appears in a normal person, and so it came about that in college I was unjustly accused of being a politician, because I was privy to the secret griefs of wild, unknown men. Most of the confidences were unsought—frequently I have feigned sleep, preoccupation, or a hostile levity when I realized by some unmistakable sign that an intimate revelation was quivering on the horizon—for the intimate revelations of young men or at least the terms in which they express them are usually plagiaristic and marred by obvious suppressions. Reserving judgments is a matter of infinite hope. I am still a little afraid of missing something if I forget that, as my fa-ther snobbishly suggested, and I snobbishly repeat a sense of the fundamental decencies is parcelled out unequally at birth. And, after boasting this way of my tolerance, I come to the admission that it has a limit. Conduct may be founded on the hard rock or the wet marshes but after a certain point I don’t care what it’s founded on. When I came back from the East last autumn I felt that I wanted the world to be in uniform and at a sort of moral attention forever; I wanted no more riotous excursions with privileged glimpses into the human heart. Only , the man who gives his name to this k, was exempt from my reaction— who represented everything for which I have an unaffected scorn. If personality is an unbroken series of successful gestures, then there was something gorgeous about him, some heightened sensitivity to the promises of life, as if he were related to one of those intricate machines that register earthquakes ten thousand miles away. This responsiveness had nothing to do with that flabby impressionability which is dignified under the name of the ‘creative temperament’— it was an extraordinary gift for hope, a romantic readiness such as I have never found in any other person and which it is not likely I shall ever find again. No— turned out all right at the end; it is what preyed on , what foul dust floated in the wake of his dreams that temporarily closed out my interest in the abortive sorrows and shortwinded elations of men. My family have been prominent, well-to-do people in this middle-western city for three generations. The Car-raways are something of a clan and we have a tradition that we’re descended from the Dukes of, but the actual founder of my line was my grandfather’s brother who came here in fifty-one, sent a substitute to the Civil War and started the wholesale hardware business that my father carries on today. I never saw this great-uncle but I’m supposed to look like him—with special reference to the rather hard-boiled painting that hangs in Father’s office. I graduated from in 1915, just a quarter of a century after my father, and a little later I participated in that delayed Teutonic migration known as the Great War. I enjoyed the counter-raid so thoroughly that I came back restless. Instead of being the warm center of the world the middle-west now seemed like the ragged edge of the universe—so I decided to go east and learn the bond business. Everybody I knew was in the bond business so I supposed it could support one more single man. All my aunts and uncles talked it over as if they were choosing a prep-school for me and finally said, ‘Why—yees’ with very grave, hesitant faces. Father agreed to finance me for a year and after various delays I came east, permanently, I thought, in the spring of twenty-two. The practical thing was to find rooms in the city but it was a warm season and I had just left a country of wide lawns and friendly trees, so when a young man at the office suggested that we take a house together in a commuting town it sounded like a great idea. He found the house, a weather beaten cardboard bungalow at eighty a month, but at the last minute the firm ordered him to Washington and I went out to the country alone. I had a dog, at least I had him for a few days until he ran away, and an old Dodge and a Finnish woman who made my bed and cooked breakfast and muttered Finnish wisdom to herself over the electric stove. It was lonely for a day or so until one morning some man, more recently arrived than I, stopped me on the road. ‘How do you get to West Egg village?’ he asked helplessly. I told him. And as I walked on I was lonely no longer. I was a guide, a pathfinder, an original settler. He had casually conferred on me the freedom of the neighborhood. And so with the sunshine and the great bursts of leaves growing on the trees—just as things grow in fast movies—I had that familiar conviction that life was beginning over again with the summer. There was so much to read for one thing and so much fine health to be pulled down out of the young breath-giving air. I bought a dozen volumes on banking and credit and investment securities and they stood on my shelf in red and gold like new money from the mint, promising to unfold the shining secrets that only and and knew. And I had the high intention of reading many other ks besides. I was rather literary in college—one year I wrote a series of very solemn and obvious editorials for the—and now I was going to bring back all such things into my life and become again that most limited of all specialists, the ‘well-rounded man.’ This isn’t just an epigram—life is much more successfully looked at from a single window, after all. It was a matter of chance that I should have rented a house in one of the strangest communities in North. It was on that slender riotous island which extends itself due east of and where there are, among other natural curiosities, two unusual formations of land. Twenty miles from the city a pair of enormous eggs, identical in contour and separated only by a courtesy bay, jut out into the most domesticated body of salt water in the Western Hemisphere, the great wet barnyard of Sound. They are not perfect ovals—like the egg in the story they are both crushed flat at the contact end—but their physical resemblance must be a source of perpetual confusion to the gulls that fly overhead. To the wingless a more arresting phenomenon is their dissimilarity in every particular except shape and size. I lived at West Egg, the—well, the less fashionable of the two, though this is a most superficial tag to express the bizarre and not a little sinister contrast between them. My house was at the very tip of the egg, only fifty yards from the Sound, and squeezed between two huge places that rented for twelve or fifteen thousand a season. The one on my right was a colossal affair by any standard—it was a factual imitation of some in, with a tower on one side, spanking new under a thin beard of raw ivy, and a marble swimming pool and more than forty acres of lawn and garden. It was mansion. Or rather, as I didn’t know Mr.  it was a mansion inhabited by a gentleman of that name. My own house was an eye-sore, but it was a small eye-sore, and it had been overlooked, so I had a view of the water, a partial view of my neighbor’s lawn, and the consoling proximity of millionaires—all for eighty dollars a month. Across the courtesy bay the white palaces of fashionable East Egg glittered along the water, and the history of the summer really begins on the evening I drove over there to have dinner with the  Buchanans.  was my second cousin once removed and I’d known  in college. And just after the war I spent two days with them in. Her husband, among various physical accomplishments, had been one of the most powerful ends that ever played football at—a national figure in a way, one of those men who reach such an acute limited excellence at twenty-one that everything afterward savors of anti-climax. His family were enormously wealthy—even in college his freedom with money was a matter for reproach—but now he’d left  and come east in a fashion that rather took your breath away: for instance he’d brought down a string of polo ponies from Lake Forest. It was hard to realize that a man in my own generation was wealthy enough to do that. Why they came east I don’t know. They had spent a year in France, for no particular reason, and then drifted here and there unrestfully wherever people played polo and were rich together. This was a permanent move, said  over the telephone, but I didn’t believe it—I had no sight into  heart but I felt that  would drift on forever seeking a little wistfully for the dramatic turbulence of some irrecoverable football game. And so it happened that on a warm windy evening I drove over to East Egg to see two old friends whom I scarcely knew at all. Their house was even more elaborate than I expected, a cheerful red and white Georgian Colonial mansion overlooking the bay. The lawn started at the beach and ran toward the front door for a quarter of a mile, jumping over sun-dials and brick walks and burning gardens—finally when it reached the house drifting up the side in bright vines as though from the momentum of its run. The front was broken by a line of French windows, glowing now with reflected gold, and wide open to the warm windy afternoon, and  in riding clothes was standing with his legs apart on the front porch. He had changed since his New Haven years. Now he was a sturdy, straw haired man of thirty with a rather hard mouth and a supercilious manner. Two shining, arrogant eyes had established dominance over his face and gave him the appearance of always leaning aggressively forward. Not even the effeminate swank of his riding clothes could hide the enormous power of that body—he seemed to fill those glistening ts until he strained the top lacing and you could see a great pack of muscle shifting when his shoulder moved under his thin coat. It was a body capable of enormous leverage—a cruel body. His speaking voice, a gruff husky tenor, added to the impression of fractiousness he conveyed. There was a touch of paternal contempt in it, even toward people he liked—and there were men at New Haven who had hated his guts. ‘Now, don’t think my opinion on these matters is final,’ he seemed to say, ‘just because I’m stronger and more of a man than you are.’ We were in the same Senior Society, and while we were never intimate I always had the impression that he approved of me and wanted me to like him with some harsh, defiant wistfulness of his own. We talked for a few minutes on the sunny porch. ‘I’ve got a nice place here,’ he said, his eyes flashing about restlessly. Turning me around by one arm he moved a broad flat hand along the front vista, including in its sweep a sunken Italian garden, a half acre of deep pungent roses and a snubnosed motor boat that bumped the tide off shore. ‘It belonged to the oil man.’ He turned me around again, politely and abruptly. ‘We’ll go inside.’ We walked through a high hallway into a bright rosycolored space, fragilely bound into the house by French windows at either end. The windows were ajar and gleaming white against the fresh grass outside that seemed to grow a little way into the house. A breeze blew through the room, blew curtains in at one end and out the other like pale flags, twisting them up toward the frosted wedding cake of the ceiling—and then rippled over the wine-colored rug, making a shadow on it as wind does on the sea. The only completely stationary object in the room was an enormous couch on which two young women were buoyed up as though upon an anchored balloon. They were both in white and their dresses were rippling and fluttering as if they had just been blown back in after a short flight around the house. I must have stood for a few moments listening to the whip and snap of the curtains and the groan of a picture on the wall. Then there was as  shut the rear windows and the caught wind died out about the room and the curtains and the rugs and the two young women ballooned slowly to the floor. The younger of the two was a stranger to me. She was extended full length at her end of the d, completely motionless and with her chin raised a little as if she were balancing something on it which was quite likely to fall. If she saw me out of the corner of her eyes she gave no hint of it—indeed, I was almost surprised into murmuring an apology for having disturbed her by coming in. The other girl, , made an attempt to rise—she leaned slightly forward with a conscientious expression— then she laughed, an absurd, charming little laugh, and I laughed too and came forward into the room. ‘I’m p-paralyzed with happiness.’ She laughed again, as if she said something very witty, and held my hand for a moment, looking up into my face, promising that there was no one in the world she so much wanted to see. That was a way she had. She hinted in a murmur that the surname of the balancing girl was Baker. (I’ve heard it said that  murmur was only to make people lean toward her; an irrelevant criticism that made it no less charming.) At any rate Miss lips fluttered, she nodded at me almost imperceptibly and then quickly tipped her head back again—the object she was balancing had obviously tottered a little and given her something of a fright. Again a sort of apology arose to my lips. Almost any exhibition of complete self sufficiency draws a stunned tribute from me. I looked back at my cousin who began to ask me questions in her low, thrilling voice. It was the kind of voice that the ear follows up and down as if each speech is an arrangement of notes that will never be played again. Her face was sad and lovely with bright things in it, bright eyes and a bright passionate mouth—but there was an excitement in her voice that men who had cared for her found difficult to forget: a singing compulsion, a whispered ‘Listen,’ a promise that she had done gay, exciting things just a while since and that there were gay, exciting things hovering in the next hour. I told her how I had stopped off in for a day on my way east and how a dozen people had sent their love through me. ‘Do they miss me?’ she cried ecstatically. ‘The whole town is desolate. All the cars have the left rear wheel painted black as a mourning wreath and there’s a persistent wail all night along the North Shore.’ ‘How gorgeous! Let’s go back, . orrow!’ Then she added irrelevantly, ‘You ought to see the baby.’ ‘I’d like to.’ ‘She’s asleep. She’s two years old. Haven’t you ever seen her?’ ‘Never.’ ‘Well, you ought to see her. She’s——‘  who had been hovering restlessly about the room stopped and rested his hand on my shoulder. ‘What you doing, Nick?’ ‘I’m a bond man.’ ‘Who with?’ I told him. ‘Never heard of them,’ he remarked decisively. This annoyed me. ‘You will,’ I answered shortly. ‘You will if you stay in the East.’ ‘Oh, I’ll stay in the East, don’t you worry,’ he said, glancing at  and then back at me, as if he were alert for something more. ‘I’d be a God Damned fool to live anywhere else.’ At this point Miss said ‘Absolutely!’ with such suddenness that I started—it was the first word she uttered since I came into the room. Evidently it surprised her as much as it did me, for she yawned and with a series of rapid, deft movements stood up into the room. ‘I’m stiff,’ she complained, ‘I’ve been lying on that sofa for as long as I can remember.’ ‘Don’t look at me,’  retorted. ‘I’ve been trying to get you to all afternoon.’ ‘No, thanks,’ said Miss to the four cocktails just in from the pantry, ‘I’m absolutely in training.’ Her host looked at her incredulously. ‘You are!’ He took down his drink as if it were a drop in the bot of a glass. ‘How you ever get anything done is beyond me.’ I looked at Miss wondering what it was she ‘got done.’ I enjoyed looking at her. She was a slender, small-breasted girl, with an erect carriage which she accentuated by throwing her body backward at the shoulders like a young cadet. Her grey sun-strained eyes looked back at me with polite reciprocal curiosity out of a wan, charming discontented face. It occurred to me now that I had seen her, or a picture of her, somewhere before. ‘You live in,’ she remarked contemptuously. ‘I know somebody there.’ ‘I don’t know a single——‘ ‘You must know .’ ‘?’ demanded . ‘What ?’ Before I could reply that he was my neighbor dinner was announced; wedging his tense arm imperatively under mine  compelled me from the room as though he were moving a checker to another square. Slenderly, languidly, their hands set lightly on their hips the two young women preceded us out onto a rosy-colored porch open toward the sunset where four candles flickered on the table in the diminished wind. ‘Why CANDLES?’ objected , frowning. She snapped them out with her fingers. ‘In two weeks it’ll be the longest day in the year.’ She looked at us all radiantly. ‘Do you always watch for the longest day of the year and then miss it? I always watch for the longest day in the year and then miss it.’ ‘We ought to plan something,’ yawned Miss, sitting down at the table as if she were getting into bed. ‘All right,’ said . ‘What’ll we plan?’ She turned to me helplessly. ‘What do people plan?’ Before I could answer her eyes fastened with an awed expression on her little finger. ‘Look!’ she complained. ‘I hurt it.’ We all looked—the knuckle was black and blue. ‘You did it, ,’ she said accusingly. ‘I know you didn’t mean to but you DID do it. That’s what I get for marrying a brute of a man, a great big hulking physical specimen of a——‘ ‘I hate that word hulking,’ objected  crossly, ‘even in kidding.’ ‘Hulking,’ insisted . Sometimes she and Miss talked at once, unobtrusively and with a bantering inconsequence that was never quite chatter, that was as cool as their white dresses and their impersonal eyes in the absence of all desire. They were here—and they accepted  and me, making only a polite pleasant effort to entertain or to be entertained. They knew that presently dinner would be over and a little later the evening too would be over and casually put away. It was sharply different from the West where an evening was hurried from phase to phase toward its close in a continually disappointed anticipation or else in sheer nervous dread of the moment itself. ‘You make me feel uncivilized, ,’ I confessed on my second glass of corky but rather impressive claret. ‘Can’t you talk about crops or something?’ I meant nothing in particular by this remark but it was taken up in an unexpected way. ‘Civilization’s going to pieces,’ broke out  violently. ‘I’ve gotten to be a terrible pessimist about things. Have you read ‘The Rise of the Coloured Empires’ by this man Goddard?’ ‘Why, no,’ I answered, rather surprised by his tone. ‘Well, it’s a fine k, and everybody ought to read it. The idea is if we don’t look out the white race will be—will be utterly submerged. It’s all scientific stuff; it’s been proved.’ ‘ getting very profound,’ said  with an expression of unthoughtful sadness. ‘He reads deep ks with long words in them. What was that word we——‘ ‘Well, these ks are all scientific,’ insisted , glancing at her impatiently. ‘This fellow has worked out the whole thing. It’s up to us who are the dominant race to watch out or these other races will have control of things.’ ‘We’ve got to beat them down,’ whispered , winking ferociously toward the fervent sun. ‘You ought to live in—’ began Miss but  interrupted her by shifting heavily in his chair. ‘This idea is that we’re Nordics. I am, and you are and you are and——’ After an infinitesimal hesitation he included  with a slight nod and she winked at me again. ‘—and we’ve produced all the things that go to make civilization—oh, science and art and all that. Do you see?’ There was something pathetic in his concentration as if his complacency, more acute than of old, was not enough to him any more. When, almost immediately, the telephone rang inside and the butler left the porch  seized upon the momentary interruption and leaned toward me. ‘I’ll tell you a family secret,’ she whispered enthusiasti-cally. ‘It’s about the butler’s nose. Do you want to hear about the butler’s nose?’ ‘That’s why I came over tonight.’ ‘Well, he wasn’t always a butler; he used to be the silver polisher for some people in that had a silver service for two hundred people. He had to polish it from morning till night until finally it began to affect his nose— —‘ ‘Things went from bad to worse,’ suggested Miss. ‘Yes. Things went from bad to worse until finally he had to give up his position.’ For a moment the last sunshine fell with romantic affection upon her glowing face; her voice compelled me forward breathlessly as I listened—then the glow faded, each light deserting her with lingering regret like children leaving a pleasant street at dusk. The butler came back and murmured something close to  ear whereupon  frowned, pushed back his chair and without a word went inside. As if his absence quickened something within her  leaned forward again, her voice glowing and singing. ‘I love to see you at my table, Nick. You remind me of a— of a rose, an absolute rose. Doesn’t he?’ She turned to Miss for confirmation. ‘An absolute rose?’ This was untrue. I am not even faintly like a rose. She was only extemporizing but a stirring warmth flowed from her as if her heart was trying to come out to you concealed in one of those breathless, thrilling words. Then suddenly she threw her napkin on the table and excused herself and ‘What a low, vulgar girl!’ ‘I don’t care!’ cried and began to clog on the brick fireplace. Then she remembered the heat and sat down guiltily on the couch just as a freshly laundered nurse leading a little girl came into the room. ‘Bles-sed pre-cious,’ she crooned, holding out her arms. ‘Come to your own mother that loves you.’ The child, relinquished by the nurse, rushed across the room and rooted shyly into her mother’s dress. ‘The Bles-sed pre-cious! Did mother get powder on your old yellowy hair? Stand up now, and say How-de-do.’ and I in turn leaned down and took the small reluctant hand. Afterward he kept looking at the child with surprise. I don’t think he had ever really believed in its existence before. ‘I got dressed before luncheon,’ said the child, turning eagerly to. ‘That’s because your mother wanted to show you off.’ Her face bent into the single wrinkle of the small white neck. ‘You dream, you. You absolute little dream.’ ‘Yes,’ admitted the child calmly. ‘Aunt got on a white dress too.’ ‘How do you like mother’s friends?’ turned her around so that she faced. ‘Do you think they’re pretty?’ ‘Where’s Daddy?’